- Hello, YouTube. Hello, David.
- Hello.
- Hey, awesome to have you here on the channel, on the livestream at the moment.
And yeah, let's just dive into the podcast.
David, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thank you. I'm really glad to be on the podcast.
- I'm really excited to have you on the podcast.
And we get to talk about a couple of interesting ideas.
We get to talk about software architecture.
People may know I'm a big fan of architecture.
I think putting your software together right makes all the difference.
We're going to talk about some ideas that are new to me,
this polylith idea that you're an advocate and fan of
and how it applies to Python.
We're also going to focus a good portion of this conversation
on monorepos and what the heck are monorepos, right?
- Yeah.
- So yeah, that'll be a lot of fun
and I'm really looking forward to it.
But let's hear your story first.
How'd you get into programming and Python?
- Yeah, how did I get into programming?
Well, it was, I guess it was when I was a kid.
My dad bought me Commodore 64.
It was like way back in the 1980s.
So that's when I started learning
the basic programming language
and how to like think in,
how to write things that are code and not like pure text.
But then I kind of, I went on a different path.
I was working mostly with design and things like that.
And the first thing I knew was a job in our business
was a web designer.
So that was what I wanted to be at first.
So I started to learn JavaScript and copy and pasted
some snippets of code on the internet and stuff like that.
- Yeah, and that's the era, I'm just guessing from the,
you know, the starting computer,
where you were sort of in time when this must have happened.
And that was probably before all these crazy JavaScript
front end frameworks and all that.
And it was more of a, how do you visually design this page
with graphic and more art and more focused on that, right?
- Yeah, before like jQuery and before like all these,
all React and all of that good stuff that we have today.
So yeah, but with Python,
I think I started about 2015 with Python.
I started with Python 2.7 and then learning,
all I think in that period,
I also learned, started to think in more like
functional programming style, more like functional-ish.
And that's coming from Python actually.
And I was very much into Node.js at that time too.
So I think around 2015, and I've been like jumping
back and forth between different languages.
I'm a really huge fan of Clojure too,
which is like 100% functional.
So I've been like visiting some different kinds
of programming languages and styles and things like that.
And now I'm back to full-time Python on my day job
and almost full-time Python during nights
because I really love to code on my spare time too
when I assume there is any chance to code.
So I'll take that one.
- Yeah, absolutely.
how much of open source is,
well, there's programmers and we have this project
we've got to work on, but we really want to build
this other thing and we're super passionate about it.
We just end up building it and sharing it and it takes off.
I think that's a very common story for sure.
So, before we move on,
how has working in Python influenced
something like Clojure or Clojure influenced
your Python thinking? They're fairly different languages, right?
- Yeah.
- Box all being less stateful,
which is a really big different way of programming.
- Yeah.
Well, I think what I learned from Python
was like the elegance and the importance
of writing elegant and simplistic code.
I was really impressed by the Zen of Python.
You know, if you type import this in a shell,
you get this nice list of how to write your code.
really liked that idea. So, I guess that's where I started to think about keeping it simple, clean,
and short. And with Clojure, it was like, that's kind of a different, total different syntax,
but also digging into a lot of functional aspects and how to think about state and how to separate
calculations from actions and data and things like that.
And I think I've brought a lot of those ideas
to back to when I'm back at Python,
how to separate different kinds of code that you write.
- Yeah, I can see that.
I feel like Python's really interesting
because you can choose to only focus on little parts of it.
That's good for beginners
'cause they only have to learn a little part,
but it's also good for people
who have particular styles that they like to work.
If you wanna write functional Python,
you don't have to create any global variables
or any classes or any, you can just,
you can write it that way, but you could completely go,
you know, really deep OO patterns.
And you can do that in Python too if you want, right?
It's completely up to you.
- Yeah, and I like that kind of freedom.
You can, you can't, you don't,
you're not forced to do either this or that.
You can learn and experiment,
and especially if you use libraries,
they are designed in different ways too.
So you don't have to limit yourself
to only use that kind of library or this kind of library.
So I really like Python,
the capabilities of Python when it comes to that,
but it's not very strict in any kind of format.
- I like that too, and I think other languages
are seeing that and adopting that as well.
You know, you see Swift with their playgrounds,
and well, Swift in general, and .NET with their,
you know, maybe we don't need namespaces and classes
and static main void for everything to get started.
- Wow.
- And they're adopting those types of things.
You know, we're talking about this,
like well, functional people might wanna write this way,
and more OO oriented people that way,
but that also could just be you in different situations.
You know, right now, this is the right tool to solve it,
and other times here's a different way
to solve a different problem,
but you can just stay in the same tools
and the same editors and the same ecosystem.
It's cool. - Yeah, definitely.
Yeah. - Yeah.
All right, well, let's start in on the first half
of our main topic here is the mono repo.
Now, it's really easy to confuse what a mono repo is
with a mono-lith versus say microservices.
And those are not really at all the same thing.
In fact, they might actually be opposites in a sense,
a monorepo and a monolith to some degree.
So maybe kick us off by telling us
what is a monorepo here?
- Yeah, so a monorepo,
I don't think it's that complicated,
but I actually, also before I started
to dig into this thing more,
I also had almost put like an equal sign
between monolith and monorepo
because that's the way I have used writing code.
I was in the .NET and C# world a lot
and you like building your website
and you have a data layer and you have a domain layer
and everything was in a repo.
So I guess Microsoft was like a reaction to that,
to separate code into isolated environments
and you can have this nice and clean little code base
and you have that does one thing
and you have this other code base
that does a different thing.
- So you're thinking like,
so if instead of just having the user authentication bit
completely just woven into the code,
we can make a little API that we call over JSON
that does the authentication
and then here's the one that has the catalog
and we could write just a little bit of code
And I guess the benefit, right,
is that whoever's working on the catalog bit,
they theoretically can just stay focused
on that little bit of code and not the entire system, right?
- Yeah. - With a microservice story.
- Yeah.
So a monorepo is, I think, from the way I see it,
it's like, it's a Git or any version control repo
that has basically all of your code
in the same repo, same repository.
And that doesn't necessarily mean that it's one program
or one app that you are going to build or compile into.
You can have several projects or artifacts in that repo.
And I guess that's why it's called the mono repo
because you can have multiple things in it.
So I guess that's the difference between a monolith
where you actually build one app
and deploy it to one place.
- Right, right.
The monolith is the opposite of the microservice style.
Whereas the monorepo is just a way of organizing your code
and sharing how do you propagate changes,
look at dependencies across either libraries or...
There are companies that take this really far,
like crazy, crazy far, like Google and Facebook,
I believe, haven't worked on it,
but I hear that they have one repo.
- Yeah.
- For like all of it.
One, really?
Just like, what's the checkout story look like on that?
- That has to be a lot of code.
- Yeah, it's gotta be a lot of code.
I believe Google-- I'm probably going to misassociate this,
but I think Google uses Bazel.
There's different tools that allow them
that are kind of not just Git, but something that
can handle that scale of code.
So it really-- when I think about organizing my code,
it's either me or me and a couple of people
working on the code and it's pretty contained.
But when you start to think about hundreds
or thousands of people across projects,
it starts to get really wild, right?
- Yeah, that has to be a completely different story.
(laughs)
- Yeah.
- Where you really come to see how they do,
how they work in the teams.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So maybe we could talk about some of the,
Why, if you're not doing this, why would you do that?
Like it seems, you highlighted that there's kind of
these two trends that you saw out there
in some of your articles.
And we'll talk about the articles and link to them.
You talked about seeing a trend of more people
trending towards this monorepo and more people
or other groups of people trending towards
having more small repos.
- Yeah.
- For, you take my little microservice example,
the user access service might be its own repository
separate from the catalog service.
Whereas others might say,
we're gonna put all that together and all the utilities
and that other data reporting project
and all of that goes into one giant repo,
even though there's a big team on it, right?
- Yeah.
Well, I think from my experience,
what I've seen joining different teams
and different companies that I've seen exactly that some,
quite recently I joined a team
at a company with several teams
and they actually migrated from a monorepo
to several repositories.
And it was part of their microservice journey
as they call it,
because they had one repo with all their code,
but that code base was so difficult to work with.
So they kind of wanted to extract one app at a time
into a separate repository just to be able to deploy that one
and work with it in a reasonable way
with tooling support and things like that.
So, and before that, I was at a different company
joining a different team,
and we went the total opposite way.
We had a couple of microservices
that we were quite easy to work with,
but we identified issues or problems with it
because maybe there's one service
that has outdated dependencies.
Or the biggest problem was the actual code duplication
because we had one service
that we had developed one thing for,
and we had another service that we needed code
that was very much like the thing we had
in that other service.
So I guess the solution could be to extract that one
into a library, but then you have three repositories
And so I guess there's difficult to find that good balance
between the one or the other.
- Yeah, I agree.
And that extracting, I mean,
that's certainly one of the possibilities.
As you say, well, we're gonna, you know what?
We now have a third repository
and we have the share, the data access repository and package
you know, that's probably not the type of thing
you publish to PyPI, but it's very likely something
you would publish to some kind of internal
dependency artifact system that you would depend upon, right?
But the problem is, if it's used in just these two places,
it's, and it sounds like that sort of description,
the kind of the team is probably working on both sides
of those microservices and they understand
the broader system, but as it grows
and more people depend upon it,
it's harder to understand this little standalone project.
Who is using it and what ways are they completely,
can we make a change here?
If we refactor this, who do we talk to about changing
even just the signature of a function?
How do we reach out to the other parts of code
or other stakeholders and say, look,
we need to change this function, but we got to,
you know, we're changing the data model
and you're going to have to figure out how to go along.
On the other hand, if all of those projects were together
in a giant mono repo,
we have tooling that understands what functions call this function
or what thing imports this class,
or who's using it, is it used at all?
Actually, maybe you could delete it.
You thought someone was using it, and no one's using it.
There's a lot of understanding of the broader integration
if it's all there with you, right?
Definitely.
What was I going to say? I totally agree. And our editors
are so smart, and they can can find usages. And if you this
function signature isn't really correct and stuff like that,
and that's so much easier when you have your source code in a
folder, but it's like right next to the one using it. So that's a huge benefit like editor wise to
the developer experience, I guess. Yeah, absolutely. And
I think one of this is both a benefit and a challenge, you know, maybe link to the mono
repo Wikipedia page. And here's some of the advantages. One of the number one advantage
is ease of code reuse.
So it's possible, not necessarily suggested,
but possible that you say, well,
the data access functions and classes
that we need on this side,
we need some of them over here,
but if you have the whole monorepo,
you could just say, well, import them in both projects
and deploy a larger piece of code to your server,
but who cares?
The servers have a lot of storage
and they'll be fine, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
(laughing)
- The challenge I think is gonna be the,
you're gonna end up with a tightly coupled architecture
pretty badly if you just say,
well, I see way over there, there's that file
and that's the one I want and we're just gonna grab that.
And it doesn't necessarily encourage good behavior
but it does make reusing code
and understand how it's being used easy, right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, and also you're like in the risk zone
of actually building a monolith again.
So, yeah. - Yeah, exactly.
Usually part of the API endpoints run there
and part of the API endpoints run there,
but they're effectively just one giant thing, right?
- So I guess what I think is that if you are using a monolith
if you want to have your code in a monolith,
I guess you would need some sort of tooling
or ideas about how to separate your code
into separate artifacts that don't have
the entire code base in its package,
only the code that is actually needed for this artifact.
So I guess that's part of the challenge,
having a monorepo.
- I would say so.
I've been thinking about this a little bit
leading up to our conversation today.
And certainly you can use packages in the,
you know, we have this problem in Python
or this challenge where packages mean different things
but it has the same word.
So a package could be just a grouping of modules
into a directory that has a gender in it
or it could be something on PyPI that you ship
and you deploy a new version on its own.
I mean, in just the on-disk, the Dunder,
and that local grouping.
You could create these groups within your Monorepo
and say, "We're going to import that," but have a little bit
of a formal separation and say, "Look, we're not necessarily going
to deploy it through some versioning story and let other people pull it in
because then we lose track of who's using it and how they're using it.
Are they on the right version?
But we'll still maybe think of them as a Python package
in a sense.
Do you have any experience with doing it one way or the other?
Any preference?
Yeah, what I was thinking of
from the company that I joined that were
migrating from their monorepo,
they had done a couple of attempts to
to do this code sharing thing
with the likes, I think it was like Git submodules or sim links and things like that.
But all of that ended up into, it became too complicated to understand what was going on.
And I think even the editor support wasn't really perfect when you had like these kind of
dynamic linking. So I guess that's why they chose to abandon that idea.
Yeah, and it sounds a little bit like with the submodules
that it was not a pure monorepo, but kind of a,
let's have different sections on our repository,
but bring it together when we see it for development
as if it was a monorepo, right?
Like, we're going to sort of put these files,
and this is a submodule, that's a submodule,
and they're kind of separate, but then once they're all
checked out and linked up, then our tool
thinks of it as one giant thing, like the monorepo would be.
Right?
- Yeah.
So that's kind of an intermediate.
I also thought about this as well.
Like maybe you could put together the Git tools like that.
I do want to highlight a couple of Git tools,
because maybe I'll take a quick bit of audience feedback
real quick, but I do think that, you know,
when it's five people, 10 people,
you just check the thing out and it's gonna be fine.
But as it gets larger and larger,
both over time and lines of code and number of people,
it's gonna be a thing where it almost becomes unmanageable
to just do a git clone URL and see what happens, right?
(laughing)
- You can go grab a coffee and when you got back,
it's not--
- Exactly, I mean, there's,
we've probably seen that XKCD
where there's people like fake sword fighting on a chair.
It's like, get back to work.
We're doing to get clone.
Leave us alone.
OK, sure, fine.
I got you.
It's going to be a while.
Some quick bit of audience feedback
says, model repos are OK if you have a dedicated team that
manages the advanced tooling required to deal with them.
Yeah, absolutely.
And sort of related, Lucas asks, would you
use Bazel for your projects?
Or rather, make files or similar in case of lints and builds?
So yeah, there's the different tools that like Facebook
and Google and those folks use.
There's also Pants.
Benji Weinberg has talked a lot about it.
I've had him on the show before
and Pants is one of these tools
that can kind of help Pants build.
But David, how about you?
What were you all using in terms of more advanced tooling
or was there anything special?
Back then, it was not really more advanced
than actually make files to make things happen.
But the place, the team that I joined,
actually started to use this,
I guess we're going to talk about it
some of the architecture called PolyLith
and there's also tooling support.
- Yeah.
- That kind of offers a solution to many of these headaches
with having a monorepo.
So, so-- - Okay, yeah, absolutely.
- And back then it was because Polylith
is originates from Clojure.
So we were actually writing Clojure code.
And for Python, I was started to look around for solution.
I actually read a little bit about Pants.
I think that can solve a lot of problems too.
It seems like a really great tool
with a lot of useful functionality.
And then there's also poetry.
I don't think, it's not really about monorepos,
but you can, I believe that you can use pure poetry
and have your dependencies like the third party libraries,
your own or the one at PyPy in sort of an,
not the third party, but your own in an editable mode.
So they will, as soon as you change something,
it will be updated.
So I guess there are some tools
that can help you along the way.
But I guess there's still a lot of frustration
and having that smooth and really joyful
monorepo experience that you would like to have.
So that's what led me to start working on this project.
- I do think that Python,
the way that its dependencies and its understanding
of linking files together through directories
and things like that makes it a little bit more challenging
than other systems.
Like if I was doing C++,
I could open up Visual Studio Code
and create a broader project and say,
these three libraries are what I want to see as my project.
And it doesn't really matter where they come from.
You build it and they link together
and there's sort of a, you know,
build the Delta only type of thing.
Whereas in Python, you kind of need to bring on
a little bit more tooling to say,
I know it looks like there's some giant Python thing here,
but just these two pieces.
That's what I want to think of as the thing, you know?
(laughing)
- Yeah.
But what we're going to talk about with some of the stuff
that you've done with Poetry,
with PolyLith and others, certainly make that relevant.
I do want to talk about the Git tools,
but it's also interesting, this comment from David Poole,
it says, "We use submodules for legal licensing reasons."
That is, to have GPL code separate from our proprietary code
rather than just dropping it in,
which obviously has different implications.
- Yeah, oh, that was very interesting to learn about, yeah.
- Yeah, I hadn't really thought about that either,
but yes, you definitely, definitely wanna think about it.
So let's just talk Git for a moment.
Now, one of the big challenges is
if we're gonna put this all into one giant GitHub repository,
which I hinted at, it could get really large,
especially if you put binary files,
like some of your build tooling or other assets,
you might put it in there,
and then that makes it extra tricky.
The less something can diff, the more it piles up quick.
So as I was thinking about this thing,
I learned about a couple of cool ideas.
Let's talk about this one first.
Partial clone.
This is something that was totally new to me.
So normally, it's get clone the URL to the get repository.
However, you can say things like filter --filter=blob.
Have you seen this before, David?
No, this is totally new to me, but it looks really interesting.
Yeah, so what happens here is the blob is like a binary file, right?
And what you're saying when you say filter blob
is it'll check out all of the git history.
And normally when you do a clone, you get,
at least for the branch neuron, you get every version of the file.
So you git clone, you disconnect from the network,
and you've got everything, right?
Which is the beauty of git.
But if you've got a really huge repository,
it also might be the drawback of git.
So you can filter out these blobs in the historical sense.
And if you say this, what you see in your hard drive
for the working directory is identical.
But the .git folder with the history only has the working version,
not all copies of the history of the blob.
And it turns out that this has like a really huge effect.
So I did this on Talk Python Training, my courses website.
And if I just say, get clone, the repo,
it pulled down 118,000 objects.
It resolved 71,000 deltas and it updated 10,000 files.
And it was a gig on disk.
If I just say filter dash dash filter equals blob colon none,
It goes from 118,000 to 10,000 downloads.
It goes from, it's less than half the size.
And the resulting files on disk, those were the same,
but the intermediate deltas were like 1/70 or 1/50.
Really a big difference.
And this is, you know, it's a pretty old repo.
It's got a lot of stuff, but it's not,
it's nothing compared to what a lot of people have.
So one, there's one problem where like, okay,
if I'm gonna try to get clone a monorepo,
there's just no way, right?
So Link adding this aspect here,
I think actually would be really valuable.
- Yeah, definitely.
Because it's, I guess in the normal,
the use case is that you want to work
with the latest version of the source code.
You want to develop something new.
So I guess that's what you want on disk.
- Yeah, most of the time.
And what happens is, if you say,
well, actually we need to switch branches,
or we need to go back three months in time,
it just goes back to the network
and clones a little bit more.
It's like an incremental clone as it needs it.
So I think actually this would help a lot of people
who don't know about it, working with monorepos
that turn out to have a lot of files,
and a lot of historical, especially binaries
that grow over time.
- Yeah.
- 'Cause those are the ones that are huge, you know,
it's not the text files usually that are the problem.
- So I have to put my (indistinct)
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely.
And related to that, related to that,
so quirky ads, wouldn't a shallow clone be more predictable?
So this is also interesting.
So shallow clones is a older way to do this in GitHub.
The problem is with shallow clones,
you don't get the full history and change log.
With these partial clones, you have all of the history,
commit history and details, you just don't have the files
and they're incrementally pulled in.
So you could do a shallow clone.
And then there's another one, what was it called?
A sparse clone.
So a sparse clone is another tool
that you can bring in here for advanced Git usage,
where you say, "I know I've got this huge directory structure,
but I just want to get these three directories,
or this sub-directory structure,"
and you clone only part of the files.
So we're talking about how Python understands
just the whole thing as one giant project,
and maybe even you check it out and try to open it,
your editor will just sit there indexing, indexing,
and autocomplete won't really work very well,
and it'll go crazy.
So you can just say, I want these three directories,
and I want them partially cloned,
so they only have the recent history,
and they're not so insane.
And you can kind of combine these
to get really focused views into a monorepo,
which I thought was pretty interesting.
Yeah, so anyway, when I think back to the story
told about how you guys were using sub-modules,
I feel like these partial clones plus sparse clones
might be a better fit than trying to
sim-link things together.
Because it really just is the same thing.
If you want to clone the whole thing, you do,
but then you can just, as you clone it, filter out.
And you can also, with those sparse clones,
you can retroactively add in,
"Oh, I also need that directory," say, "Get Sparse Add."
- Oh, cool. - I now need this piece
to come in as well.
And there's some interesting ways to put these together.
So I think these tools are gonna be,
for people who are working with monorepos,
I think those advanced Git features that I called out
might be really helpful.
What do you think, David?
- Yeah, I totally agree,
especially when you have a monorepo that is a lot of code.
So it seems like you wouldn't want to live without it,
I guess, because it's probably a lot of helpful.
- Yeah, I think so too.
So sparse checkout, I believe is actually
like I said, call it sparse clone.
But I think it's sparse checkout is the term
I'll link to it as well.
Partial clone and sparse checkout, there we go.
- Nice.
- Okay, cool. - There's so many
good features in Git that I guess most of us don't use.
- Yeah, I think so too.
I've been doing Git for a really long time
and this sparse checkout is completely new to me.
I only learned about it
'cause I was trying to research a little bit more.
Well, how do you do actually manage with these monorepos
as we are preparing for our chat today?
So yeah, I think there's a lot of tools and flexibility
that are not obvious or not apparent
that people can use to make monorepos
work really, really well.
But there's still a lot of interesting ways
to structure your code and put it together
and use it once you get it checked out.
So maybe let's, what do you wanna start?
You wanna start with a fresh take on monorepos?
This is one of your articles.
- Yeah, yeah, why not?
- Yeah, yeah, so tell us the story here.
- Yeah, I wrote this article about a year ago,
most a year ago, and that was me trying to,
Before that, I was trying to figure out how to work,
have this nice developer experience in a monorepo.
And coming from Clojure and having learned new things
and have some new fresh ideas on how you can solve things,
I wanted to give it a try in Python too.
So, and also at the same time,
I was actually doing work with microservices,
but in several repos, and I kind of found myself,
it was not a huge thing, but it was like a logger,
sort of a logger module or a package.
And I knew that I had done it in the other microservice
just a couple of weeks ago.
So, okay, what should I do?
Should I create a library?
no, this is way too small to create a library.
And it's not, it's not, wasn't even open open source.
It's like a proprietary system.
So when you would need the private people servers
and things like that.
So I just ended up in copying some code.
- And you know, while people would go, of course
you should never do that, but sometimes it's just not
it's just not complicated enough or important enough
or big enough to justify all the change management
and dependencies and you know what?
That file, it goes into this project
and it's usually it's fine until they get out of sync
or there's some weird, you wanna upgrade one
and then, oh, well, where else is it, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, okay.
- Or you discover a bug in that part
and you forget about that you have copied it
to the couple of times and now with the other repo.
So then you have a lot of work to do.
- There's probably a whole section of cybersecurity history
and like breaches where they thought they fixed a problem
in some system.
And it turns out someone else found a copy of it
that wasn't fixed and broken.
And yeah, there's a, yeah, this is not ideal.
Yeah, so what'd you do?
- Yeah, so I really wanted to give the podleth in Python
try because I really enjoyed the way things are structured and a lot of these like headaches
are solved there.
So I started to...
- PolyLith is really, really new to me.
Maybe tell people about PolyLith before we go on because I suspect a lot of people don't
know about this.
Yeah, yeah, let's begin there and we'll come back to it.
- Yeah, good.
it's an architecture, but it's also a tool or something with a tooling support.
And it's open source and it's developed by a fellow Swede, Joakim Tengstrand.
And I was fortunate to actually work in the same team as him. So he was done introducing
this and we decided to give it a try. He was new in our team.
And I was, I have to confess, I was a little bit skeptical at the beginning because skeptical
of monorepos in general too, because based on previous bad experiences.
So the polylith is the main idea is that you have, that you create, when you write code,
you're supposed, you aim to write them in small parts.
And that's what Pololith called components.
And a component, Pololith uses the idea of Lego,
but for code.
So a component could be a piece, a brick, a Lego brick,
that you can reuse in several ways.
And a component can be everything from a small tech,
something that you normally would put in a utils folder,
like functions that do maybe some parsing or something,
but it can also be a combination of other components.
So they don't have to be of the same size.
It's the idea of composability and reusability
that is the important thing.
So, and like the big parts of PolyLith are components
and then we have something called bases
and that is also a component,
but a kind of special kind of components.
If you think about Lego,
if you're going to build like a house,
you often have some, a base plate
where you put your Lego bricks on it.
So a base is sort of that part.
And in code that could be like,
if you have like a fast API app,
maybe a base plate could be where you define the end points.
Like you use the API decorator style
or something like that.
So that could be a base.
And then the code that actually does something
could be a combination of different components.
And all of this--
- I rushed away to think of it.
But so when you think, you know,
whenever you talk about stuff,
one of the things that's difficult is to understand
what is the scale or how are these different?
So, you know, one way, well, our functions components,
our modules components, our packages components,
like, you know, what are, how do I identify that
since it's not, you know, a formal language runtime term?
- Yeah.
- Help me understand how you make these things in Python.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
Yeah, that was really interesting because
you can see a component,
it's not a full blown feature,
like maybe a library that you publish in on PyPi,
PyPi would be.
It's smaller than that.
And I guess it could be a single function,
but it's probably one or more functions
that kind of relates to it.
Let's say that you,
what should I have prepared with an example,
but let's say that you want to parse a CSV file
or something.
Then you would probably separate the different things
you want to do with that cfc file into functions already.
And the component is where you kind of group the functions
that kind of relate to each other
or that makes sense to have in a Python package.
And then I mean, a namespace with a dunder in it.
So that could be a component.
Yeah.
- Yeah, because although it could be modeled
one of these sub packages, it's those sub packages often have multiple jobs and
roles and you're like, let's, let's stay really focused on, on the one thing that
it does.
Right.
Yeah.
Okay.
Um, yeah, so, and all of this, this lives in a, in a, what Pololith calls a
workspace and that is basically a repository, with a, with a, with
that top configuration about how your repository looks like.
So you have your components in namespace packages,
basically, and you have your basis,
the entry points of your apps.
Then you have something called projects or a project,
and that is the artifacts that you want to build.
So you can have only one project
if you're going to build one thing,
maybe a fast API service.
But the benefit comes when you are
about to build something new,
then you have your project infrastructure,
like the project configuration and what it is
defined in a folder called projects.
And then, but the code you use,
you pick the code from the components and basis folder.
So you will reuse the same source code
and then you package it into different artifacts.
- I see.
So it sounds a little bit,
yeah, sorry.
So it sounds a little bit like we've got this monorepo
with all of this stuff and the polylith,
its job is to say, well,
we're gonna look into these little parts of this monolith,
and I need this part and this part and this part.
And it's some tooling and some concepts
to help you manage some artifact.
We don't usually have exact build artifacts.
Often if you're not doing,
shipping out separate packages,
but maybe these three pieces here
make up the fast API service
that we're gonna host over there.
And maybe these two services
make up the data science tools
or when I give to the data scientists for their notebooks.
And there could be some overlap in those, right?
- Yeah, exactly, yeah.
- Okay.
- And another good thing is with the workspace
is that you don't really do much work
in the project folder or something like that
because the main idea is that you have
a developer development environment
that includes all your bases, all your components.
So the good thing with that is that you can experiment
and try out code without worrying about
if you have imported the correct stuff.
You just, you have a top project folder
containing all of your dependencies and packages,
and then you can take it from there.
And once you're ready to build a project,
build something out of it, an app or whatever it is,
then you can start constructing
that project specific configurations.
You can choose where you want to start,
but I usually start from the development workspace.
And I really like a way of working
called the Ripple driven development,
but I also learned from Clojure,
which is they try out things in a Ripple basically.
(laughs)
- Yeah.
- So that's a really nice developer experience
that you get from having the entire source code,
you can try out things, combine components
and develop new features.
- So doing more and more of that as well,
this ripple driven development,
or I'd say not necessarily development, but exploration.
I got to kind of understand,
I'm not really sure is this gonna click together right?
Or is this rather than putting a lot of structure in place,
'cause I'm not even sure I really wanna stick with it,
fire up a REPL.
For those of you who don't know, if you just type Python,
what you get is a redevelopment loop.
That's the REPL.
I do it in PyCharm these days
because PyCharm has a
Python console, but it gives you auto-complete
and tab completion
of the things that are in your project
when you're playing in the REPL,
but still, same idea.
- That's really great.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Are you guys
- Are you guys using this on your projects right now?
Or what's the (indistinct)
- Yeah, I'm fairly new to the team that I joined.
So I've introduced them to the ideas,
but they have like already code and stuff in place.
So my hopes are that we will give it
once we have something new to develop
or include an existing microservice,
maybe we could give this idea a try.
So that's basically--
- That's always the problem.
Yeah, that's always the problem is,
even if you yourself are not new,
the ideas may be new to you
and you've done a bunch of previous work.
Like for me, I was showing you that repo before,
I'm just, I'm thinking, there's a lot of cool stuff
I could do about how I restructure this and reuse it
and make it avail, you know, sort of bring more
of the monorepo stuff to some of the things I'm doing.
but then I got to update the continuous deployment changes
and I've got to update where the web server,
you know, it's just like,
there's all this stuff that's there and it's,
you know, do you kind of pause what you're doing
to try some new big organization of code here?
That's how it goes, right?
- At least I learned Apollo,
that's where we actually used it in production.
We had several kinds of different services and apps
So where we have had everything in a polarly monorepo,
but that was closure.
- Yeah, yeah.
Enclosure is a compiled language like C++ or C#.
Is that right?
- Yeah, it's on top of the JVM.
So that is compiled, yeah, to through that.
- Yeah, I do feel like things are just a little,
the deliverable artifacts are slightly more obvious
and easy to distinguish when you're talking
about something that compiles.
And like, here's the library that drops into the bin folder
and here's the executable binary that drops,
you know, there's an output folder
that has all the pieces that were selected.
Whereas Python, you gotta be a little more,
a little more careful how you put that together.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- So what I came up to was,
how can this idea be used in Python?
And then that was actually what led me to Poetry,
which I think is a really nice tool.
And because Poetry, I think has a lot of nice ways
of handling projects and dependencies and structure
and stuff like that.
But there were a couple of things missing
to make this idea work,
because since you are,
when you have a project configuration,
you actually include components in from a relative path.
So you navigate up and navigate down
to the actual component.
And if it would just build a wheel
or a source distribution from that,
that wouldn't be a valid package
because then you would need to ship
the entire monorepo structure
and you don't want to do that.
So what I did was I developed a plugin to Poetry
that actually allows for having relative includes
and that will build the code.
It will build a wheel and a source distribution
with the kind of correct path.
So it takes all the package dependencies
and puts them in the same folder basically
before it does the wheel.
And then you have a valid distribution that you can use.
So it does a little bit of copying and stuff like that.
- All right, so the actual output here,
it's a couple of wheels that we could say,
pip install into a virtual environment
and they work together, is that right?
- Yeah. - Okay.
- So, and I tried this idea with like services,
like fast API services, instead of including
the source code, like as a tree,
I'm installing it with pip from a wheel
or a source distribution from preferably from a wheel
if you don't have any like operating system specific stuff.
So, and I think that works really well.
And it's like the end result,
if you do it in a Docker container,
you can like have the full control of what's in there.
So the output from any kind of...
Yeah, sorry.
- Yes, yeah.
in your Docker file that builds the Docker image,
you can just say, copy these three wheels over,
pip install them into my Python environment
I have over there.
And it's just taken the, what do you call them?
Workspaces that they need over there.
What is the terminology that you call the artifacts here?
I mean, I know they're wheels and packages,
but is there a poly term that matches?
- Oh, I don't think so.
maybe it's like a built artifact perhaps.
And it's probably the most simplistic scenario
is that you have like an app, like a API endpoint
or maybe a CLI app or even a library.
And you probably want to install them in different places,
maybe you, or even on AWS Lambda.
So you can have the control over the deployment in your CI
saying that I want to deploy this Lambda here
and I want to deploy this fast API over there.
So, and with Polariff you can build these wheels differently.
- Nice, yeah.
I feel like the, if you think of microservices
and monolith, the AWS Lambda or any serverless function,
functions as a service story is like the most extreme
version of this.
Here's a single function that gets deployed.
One after another.
It's kind of out of control.
- And you have all of them
separate repositories.
- Oh, please no.
That would be definitely tricky.
I want to come back and talk more about
this Poetry plugin because it's really cool.
Let's address
this question from Lucas here.
How would you approach
versioning in a mono repo, like of these different services
and of the different pieces.
So if I'm going to have that fast API thing that builds over there,
I'm going to have some other projects that are built
with some overlap that are shared over to, say, my data science team.
They're going to analyze data in some other way
but reuse some of the code.
I've got some thoughts, but what are your thoughts on versioning,
say, in the repository or how you deploy them?
- Yeah, that's a really good question.
If I'm looking at it from a Polylith perspective,
then I think I would suggest a very simplistic solution.
So let's say that you have your,
this project depends on something with this version
and the other project is still on an earlier version.
So, and I think that can be solved
with the components itself
because all source code is made up of all these components.
So if you're going to build a new version of something,
and if that version uses a new third-party dependency
or that is incompatible,
I would suggest you to add it as a new separate component.
So your new projects that will use that one
will pick that component instead of the old.
And I think it's a good practice if these components
have the same or as long as it's possible, the same API.
So it should be easy to switch from the old to the new one.
So that would be my solution to versioning,
at least when using PolyLive.
- Yeah, okay.
If we look at not the mono repo style,
but you build an artifact, like a wheel from one repo,
and you put it up there and someone else
depends upon that, maybe through an internal
artifact management private PyPI,
you would pin your version in the requirements file
for that other one, right?
because that repo is changing at a different rate
and a different cadence than maybe the library
that it depends upon.
And that's really natural for us as Python people
because we already have a great long list of things
that are open source that we don't build,
that we depend on, right?
FastAPI, Pydantic, and Starlet would be an example
from what we've been talking, right?
Those things you don't control and you depend on them.
So you pin the versions and upgrade them as you see fit.
But one of the advantages of the monorepo,
to me, as far as I see it at least,
is the whole system, not just your part of the system,
but the whole system is consistent all the time
on the main branch or the production branch
or whatever the shipping branch is.
So I think you would maybe branch,
do some of your work, merge that back in,
and at that point, you could ship everything
if you need to, right?
It's because you're continuously keeping it together
as a whole system, not like, well, that library built
and that library built because they're separate repos,
but you put them together
and who knows what's gonna happen.
I think this is an advantage of the monorepo in a sense.
- Yeah, me too, definitely.
I think it makes it easier to get noticed about using,
if some parts of the code is using a certain version
of a dependency, you will learn about it quite quickly
because if you would install it and try to run the code.
So it's easier to notify, and hopefully it's easier
to also update that code.
But if you are in a situation where there's so much code
that you need to refactor, maybe there's a breaking change
that kind of has rethought the entire idea of that app,
maybe you need to do some sort of separation
and keep it all until you have the time to refactor that.
I guess in most cases, it's pretty straightforward
to update just everything in the model repo.
- Right, yeah, exactly.
And if you've got some sort of continuous integration
or some kind of automated check,
you're gonna find out pretty quickly
this change you made has a consequence over there.
And I think that's why people are really,
people who are psyched about monorepos are excited about it.
It also feels to me like
if there was gonna be a breaking change,
it's gonna happen either way.
It's just, is it gonna happen in small little pieces
or is it gonna happen in one terrible, huge,
oh, you got the new one?
Well, let me tell you, the new one's really different.
It doesn't work anymore.
Like, oh no.
just like you want to merge more often, or you want to try to integrate things more often,
and not just wait some long period of time and go, "Now do they go together?"
Why are there a hundred or a thousand merge conflicts? I don't know, right? The more you
do these little continuous checkbacks and integrations, it's just going to be so much
- Oh, yeah. Totally agree. - Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, the only scenario where you don't have to go back
and pay that penalty is where the other service
that you're versioning against says,
"We're never going to go to the new version."
And if this is internal code, it's unlikely that it's never going to go
to the new version unless it becomes just dead,
and then who cares?
You know, right? So you're going to need to integrate them eventually.
need to integrate them eventually,
just keep doing it continuously.
So yeah, I'm starting to really come around
to the idea of these things, yeah.
- Yeah, good.
- So this PolyLith plugin for Poetry,
it's super cool. - Yeah.
- So for example, here on your example,
you say Poetry, space poly, space info on the terminal,
on the command prompt. - Yeah.
- And it'll say, hey, look, in here we have two projects
made of two components and two bases,
the Lambda project and the FastAPI project.
And they're made up of these different elements.
And it really shows, you know,
what part of your code is depending on the other ones.
It even gives you a pretty table.
This made with rich.
- Yeah, it's rich.
I love that.
- It looks great.
- Oh, great, yeah.
This is my new favorite.
It's favorite too.
It's so good.
- Yeah, so it's a really nice looking UI
that you put together here as well.
- Yeah, thanks.
I'm really happy to hear that.
Yeah, that's--
- Yeah, so how easy are people to--
Yeah, go ahead, sorry.
Don't mean to just talk over you.
- Yeah, I just wanted to mention that what we see here
is the tooling support for the polylith thing in Python.
And I decided to make it as a poetry plugin.
I have some plans to like break it out of poetry
to make it a separate CLI too.
Maybe I'll do that in the future,
but I thought it was a good fit for poetry
since I'm relying on a lot of poetry features.
And the command there, polyinfo,
is showing you an overview of your monorepo.
And this is my example project with,
so it's not a lot of code,
but the idea is that you can,
you will list all your components and basis.
The common information, these are bricks.
And then you get a sort of a overview
of what's in that monorep.
You can sort of get a idea of what's in there.
What does this thing do?
And then it's listed per project.
So you can see which project is actually using which brick.
And you can use that information later.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, let me just give a little bit of visual information
for people listening.
So under the brick column, it says we have the logging,
we have the messaging, we have the greet API,
and we have the messages for Lambda.
And then you've got in different columns,
the different projects that might be consuming them
in little check marks or dashes to say using or not using it.
It makes it really visually clear
how your elements fit together, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
I was just going to say that there's a,
I'm continuously adding commands to this tooling.
And there's also, you can use this information,
the information about the workspace
and the individual project to, in your CI to determine,
let's say that you change the message component,
you do something in it,
And then you would want to have the projects
that are affected built for that.
So the tooling will help your CI to make decisions
if it should build this project
or if it should skip building because nothing has changed.
So that's part of the tooling support.
- That's pretty interesting because we've had attempts
And they've always been like an awesome 80% solution
that never quite works.
But really good tool ideas, I guess, to say,
if you change this code,
what actually needs to be tested again?
Or what needs to be analyzed again?
If this other part of your system doesn't depend on it,
you don't need to run those tests, right?
And if just the file changes,
that doesn't tell you anything.
You need to look at things like code coverage.
what part of the system was touched by this at all?
Those are always really tricky,
and how do you keep a history of code coverage to know what to do?
And all those attempts I've seen, just like,
"We tried, but we don't really do that.
We'll just run the files I've changed," which is never enough.
But this is a natural way to express dependencies in that tree,
to say, okay, if we change the greet API,
we see that the Lambda thing doesn't work with it.
So we don't need to test anything to do with the Lambda stuff.
We only need to test the fast API aspect, right?
- Yeah, yeah, exactly. - Is that tooling in place now?
- Yeah, that's in place now. - Okay.
So the poly info command,
I think it was the first command that I actually added.
Then there's a diff command.
And what did I added?
Yeah, the latest addition to commands is a check command
because you might, since you are,
I was talking about that development experience
that you're working on in a development project
where you have everything,
and then you might not touch the project that much.
And that means that you could potentially forget
to include dependencies because as of today,
there's no automatic thing yet.
I'm planning to add that later,
but so far you need to keep track of your dependencies
and stuff like that.
So I added a check command that actually does,
performs analysis on the source code.
So if you, let's say that one of the components uses
the requests library or something like that,
and you don't have it in your dependencies,
then you would be notified for that particular project.
It's very likely that you would discover it anyway
in your development environment,
but this is an extra check to just make sure
once you're about to build something,
can I really build this specific project?
So yeah, so it's a few commands,
but it will be more commands
that are more and more useful, I guess.
So.
- Yeah, it looks great.
And you have some examples over in the Python PolyLith
examples repository that people can check out.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so is the Poetry plugin ready for people
if they wanted to use it?
- I think so, I know I haven't any stats yet,
but I have a couple of users that have contacted me
through the GitHub repo and social media
that some of them have just experimented with it
and others have, I think that actually are working with it
in their like daily work.
And I think it's useful.
I have to remind myself to contact them
and regular to just check up how it goes.
And hopefully they will come to this repo
and let me know if something doesn't work as intended.
So, but it's a new tool
and it probably needs some more work on it, of course.
- Yeah.
Well, a lot of people hear about it now,
they can come check it out and play with it
and see if it- - Oh, that would be great.
- Yeah, and I'm sure you're taking contributions and PRs
and you wouldn't mind if people had some additions.
- Yeah, I would love to have that.
So contributions are very welcome, yeah.
- And you also have really nice examples here.
Like you have two videos that show how it works,
you know, 15 minute YouTube videos
and you've got some pictures and, you know,
well done on that.
It makes it really easy for people to come and just see like,
okay, is this interesting?
as it applied to me.
- Thanks. - Good work.
I do want to make one really quick follow-up.
Corky out there had mentioned that maybe shallow clones
were a better, more predictable choice
than the partial clones with the filter equals blob.
In general, the people at GitHub are recommending
not to use the shallow clones anymore,
but to use instead these partial clones,
because it keeps the history and it can incrementally go back
and pull the stuff in as needed.
However, there is one time where you may really want those shallow clones.
And the reason I'm thinking of this is you talked about builds
and using this to make builds run faster
and only focusing on the parts that have changed.
If you have a CI,
the CI doesn't care about the history of your GitHub project.
It just wants the working files, right?
- Yeah. - So you can do a shallow clone
I'm going to say, "Just give me only the files
on the tip of this branch and then build it."
And that could be dramatically faster than saying,
"Give me all five years of history of every single file
and reassociate that."
If you're thinking about CI, this shallow clone idea
that I was dismissing a little bit
is exactly a good choice, I think,
because you don't care about version history
if you're trying to see if the current version builds or not.
So anyway, just a quick follow up on that.
All right, David, I think we're probably out of time.
I definitely encourage people to go check out
your poetry plugin.
They can check out polylith at polylith.getbook.io.
Of course, I'll link to it in the show notes.
Now, before you get out of here,
I've got the two final questions to ask you, of course.
If you're gonna write some code,
if you're gonna work on the Poetry, PolyLift plugin,
whatever, what editor are you using these days?
- Well, these days I use Emacs.
I really like the tool.
Before Emacs, I was really an IDE guy.
I really liked PyCharm too,
but then I decided to learn Emacs and I'm stuck.
I don't want, I don't,
every programming language,
I'm going to code everything in Emacs.
- Nice, yeah.
Long, long ago, that was my very first editor
for programming.
- Oh, oh cool.
- And then, yeah, brings me back to working
on Silicon Graphics mainframes,
computers doing C++.
Notable PyPI package, something,
could be something we talked about,
something else that you wanted to tell people about
that you thought was awesome, ran across recently.
- Well, I have to say Rich,
because it's such an awesome tool.
when you're going to develop a CLI
and want it to look nice.
And yeah, I would,
Rich is a really, really good tool.
There were a lot of visualization features
and stuff like that.
So that's a fantastic tool.
- Yeah, good recommendation.
There's so much momentum behind Rich these days.
And if you're making some CLI developer oriented tool,
just give it a little color,
give it a little structure
and something like Rich, even just a little bit of color
or a little bit of distinguishing,
one line of text from another,
it makes such a big difference
in being able to use it really quickly and easily.
And Rich is probably the best way to do that by far, right?
- Yeah.
You should check out my new latest command, Polycheck,
because it uses a rich feature that I'm really happy about.
It's silly, but I'm really happy.
It uses an emoji while you're waiting.
(laughs)
- Fantastic, oh yeah, I love emojis.
I love emojis in CLIs as well.
All right, final call to action.
People wanna get started with monorepos, with polylith,
with some of these ideas we've talked about.
What do you tell them?
- I would say,
head over to the polylith Git repo
or the official polylith docs and read about it
and see--
also, if you're interested in monorepos in general,
check out the other solutions that are out there,
because there are a lot of different approaches
with different kind of focuses that maybe
fit your situation best.
I'm, of course, pro-Polylith, because I develop a tool
and really like that.
But there's probably tools that are better
for a different situation.
So just explore, I would say.
- Right, right.
The tools that maybe Google chooses to manage its code base
might be the wrong tools that you choose for yours
because the scale is so different, right?
You might have so much complexity that it's not relevant.
You know, it makes it really hard,
but you don't need that complexity
'cause you've got five projects,
not 5,000 projects, right?
So yeah, absolutely, look around is good advice.
Okay, David, thank you for being here.
It's been a really fun chat. I learned a bunch.
Yeah, thank you.
It's been really fun to be on the channel.
Thank you.
Yeah, you bet. Bye-bye.